Welcome back!
Today, we are going to go ahead and begin
a new chapter.
In this chapter, I will envelope the
basics of arrays.
So, that is one of the concepts,
which I have introduced
in the previous chapter.
Just briefly, I mentioned it.
But let's go ahead and take a look at
what arrays really are because you will
be dealing a lot with them
and you will need them
for a lot of things, believe me.
So, as we introduce arrays in C++,
let's go ahead and say what they actually
are so arrays by definition are
basically data structures
that contain a number
of easily accessible elements of the same
type.
Now, here we talk about one
dimensional arrays.
But we will cover advanced part
in later tutorials.
So,
the concept is
basically to have all these elements
stored in a sequence of some sort
and then be able to access them
by some sort of a reference
Though very often we are required to group
a number of variables of the same type
into one logical unit.
So,
For example, a student grade
cars some numbers that represents
some parameters
etc so if you have certain grades
you would need them all
to be in one logical unit,
which an array can actually provide you
with.
Arrays are basically homogenous data
structures
because all elements are of the same
type.
Let's go ahead and dive into the very
first section here.
So, I just go ahead and
New,
yes a project,
Console application go
Really should click skip
Arrays,
ok next,
finished.
So
let's
have actually
now this
this is becoming somewhat useful.
You're going to remove this
and
this.
In declaring an array, you will require
a following syntax,
I'm sure that it is relatively familiar
to you. You are required to define a type
and then you need an
Array name and then after
the array name you would need a size.
So, size is a relative term.
It doesn't necessarily...
you can define here.
You can simply initialize an array to
a certain amount of elements and that
is going to define the size as well.
So, what we want to do is,
this was pseudo code.
Let's just go ahead and clear an array.
This is just a
declaration of an array. This is without
an initialization
arr1
Let's call it like that.
The size of this array will be 10.
So it has the potential to contain,
to store
ten elements.
Non of these elements for the time being
are
initialized.
So,
I can do this as well
float arr2
Let's go ahead and give this one a size
of three. This is not initialization.
We're just defining how many
elements does array need to contain.
and with this
basic part,
let's take it that an array does need
a defined size,
prior to its usage.
So you need to define the size
fo the array.
There are ways of
not defining
not putting a fix number here
and actually have an array that
is dynamic.
So, this will be done later on, on the
advanced course
because we're going to need pointers
and trust me
at a certain point of time,
you will need arrays
that whose sizes are not fixed.
Who's sizes can change and alter.
So you can basically store in theory
an infinite amount of elements.
Anyway, so something scalable.
Let's put it like that.
But that's all for the later part,
For the time being,
I just take it that arrays need to have
fixed sizes.
And that's how they're usually used
in the very beginning
of things, and later on as well people
tend to put fixed sizes as well.
So, each elements of an array can be
accessed by a particular index.
But we have to be careful since
the indexing in arrays
I remember mentioning this somewhere
along the merry way, that indexing in
arrays starts from 0.
So, the first element
is not indexed with one.
It is indexed with a 0.
So, if you
will go ahead and do initialization to
demonstrate this. So let's go ahead and
do it like this. arr1
element0
shall be 5.
So, this is the first element,
of the array.
You can also, you don't need to initialize
them
in any particular order you can initialize
them in any order you like.
So arr1, again
at element
element at position, index 4.
Sorry not element 4, element at index
4.
shall be equal I don't know to 10
let's say.
and
element at
position 9,
Shall
be equal to
100, let's put it like that.
So,
This is basically the last element.
Why, because indexing begins at zero.
Let's count 0 1 2 3
4 5 6 7 8 9
10 numbers.
So, the size of the array is indeed 10.
It is also important to mention
that
the compiler won't warn us and nor
it can
if we access memory locations that are
outside of the range of our array
but this locations are
called pits basically and they are not
easily detected.
Because the program can run out in
out of 10 cases basically.
And because the program can run out in
8 out of 10 cases sorry.
and in other two it doesn't actually
run.
What do I mean by this?
Well, if you have an array 1,
and it has a size of 10,
and if you try to access like
the 50th element of this array,
which
basically is outside of the bounds of
this array,
the program
as I said,
it's going to run in 8 cases
out of ten.
and it's not going to warn us. And it's
going to be a problem because
it's going to read something from
memory
location and
it could read some sensitive information
that's how the overflows occur,
and
it could also just read some
random junk, which could cause a lot
of confusion in our logic.
Because C++ in of itself does not do
boundary checking.
So, this is a case in Java, you won't be
able to achieve this in Java but
take everything that I say with the grain
of salt.
But as I said this is not the case in
C++.
That is one of the beauties
of the C++ language because
it allows you to afford what you want to
do. There is no restrictions, restraints
of whatsoever.
So, let me just give you
one example
that is out of range.
so let's take away the float
arr2,
whose size is 3.
So, 0 1 2
that's it. But if we say
that
arr2 and we are
trying to initialize
like
element with index 3.
11 so,
arr2 has three elements and
the last one is
this will be the last element.
This will be the last element because
it goes like this, zero.
1, 2
but we are trying to initialize
the third element to 11.
The program can run correctly
but it is ill-formed program and
it's bound to cause some problems.
Because you do not know what's in that
memory location,
you could be overwriting something
that is imporant to the functioning of
your other programs or the system
in general.
So, that can be a problem because
something could be located in that
memory location
where you are putting this number
and that's basically
important to the proper functioning
of your machine
and you are basically deleting that
and putting number 11 there.
So, when the machine needs
to access those resources. It goes there
I have number 11 here.
And it is supposed to be my pointer
or printer something like that.
Just be aware of those things.
This is like the very wrong way of
doing things and
if you're reading from these locations
outside of the bounds of the array
that is also a very wrong way
of going about
things.
So anyway,
we're going to cut it here and
we're going to go ahead
and begin next tutorial where I'll
talk a bit more about the memory
representation. It's going to be a fairly
short one.
And just something I really need
to demonstrate